tonight we are in Cardiff welcome to
question time on tonight's panel James
cleverly chairman of the Conservative
Party he campaign for Boris Johnson as
leader and for BRICS it during the EU
referendum born into a vine where he's
now the local MP trained barrister and
Labour's shadows mr. general Nick
Thomas Simmons Adam price a former MP
elected to the National Assembly of
Wales in 2016 and since last year the
leader of Clyde Kamri previously an MP
for both the Conservatives then you Kip
now an assembly member and leader of the
brexit party in Wales Mark reckless and
the businesswoman and campaigner who's
taken the government to the Supreme
Court twice and one Jena Miller
[Applause]
[Music]
welcome to our panel for audience here
and of course to you at home and we are
for the first time tonight here in
Cardiff in the Senate so it is great to
be in a parliament tonight of all nights
now you don't have to be here of course
to join in you know the score hashtag
BBC Q T on Facebook on Twitter and on
Instagram
join in the conversation right let's
start with our first question tonight
which is from Maura Ellis is it Hamburg
to worry about inflammatory language
which fuels populism and conflict Jeana
let's not with you gosh I don't know
where to start almost having worked
extremely hard to put the MPs back where
they should be yesterday I watched in
total horror and disgust yesterday what
I saw in the house and not from any
particular side the the ratcheting up of
inflammatory language is not helping
anyone on any side any cause doesn't
matter how you vote which party you
belong to this is about conducting
yourself with Dean decency and respect
and actually you know now we have so
many people tuning in to our Parliament
because of the Supreme Court I actually
had someone from Holland say to me
yesterday a senior lawyer in Holland say
she's so anxious to see the first day
back and she thought it was a Perry
parody Channel the parliamentary channel
when she tuned in and I think we have to
be very mindful but there's this sort of
scorched earth strategy going on here
where you sort of divide and conquer and
you ratchet up a lot of poison and
hatred and I find it incredibly
disturbing because whatever happens with
brexit what is going to be left after
this is going to be take us years to
come back from and this is not Great
Britain this is not our country where a
decent tolerant country where people at
the top should be setting an example and
our parliamentarians should be ashamed
of themselves
are you ashamed gems I actually agree
with much not not all but I agree with
much of what Tina has just said what we
have seen over the last few years is
increasingly binary and confrontational
politics and now I am very conscious
that I have been you know a passionate
advocate for my party and my politics
but it is uncomfortable seeing how very
divisive politics has become it's not
good we do need to we do need to resolve
it what meant most question in
particular sites the word humbug and
more I assume you're referring to the
Prime Minister's comment replying to
labour in people the sheriff which she
talked about death threats abuse every
day quoting Boris Johnson's words and he
said I've never had such humbug in all
my life no what what his response was to
was Paula who I know unlike very well
she attributed to him certain words that
he had not said and that's what he was
saying surrender act he said that
betrayal need to betray he said betray
traitor I'm not sure he said that okay
so two out of three no one out of three
surrender act and betray that's two out
of three that's the point is Paula made
Paula suggested he had said things which
he had not said that's what he was
responding when the broader point the
broader point is that we do need to find
opportunities where we can be more
collaborative where we can come together
where we can focus on other things the
whole brexit debate is by its nature a
very binary topic and that generates
very binary yesterday by saying sorry
for lying not lying but giving unlawful
advice of the Queen that would have set
a different tone yesterday if of all his
words being a classics you know scholar
from Oxford that's the one word he
doesn't seem to be capable of finding
which is sorry
the appointment
I mean we may well come onto this
subject later the point is that I think
we all have a duty to be careful in our
language and I think Jean was absolutely
right
when she said this hasn't come from only
one side of the political debate I know
that she has withstood a volume and a
ferociousness of abuse which nobody
should have to deal with and I would
like to see that end I happen to think
that the sooner we can focus on topics
like the economy and education and the
NHS where we are more aligned than
divided I think that will help bring
some temperature out of this argument
and help us move forward well it more
what's your view on this since you asked
the question what concerns me mostly is
that we all lead very busy lives and not
all of us can spend time looking at the
minutiae of politics on Newsnight and so
quite often we go past news agents where
we see the word traitor or betrayed and
we hear Johnson ranting on about
surrender pacts and sometimes I feel the
actual message gets lost in translation
about what is really going on on a more
kind of practical level if Boris Johnson
wants to get his currently non-existent
brexit bill through Parliament the
paperless brexit brexit bill Easter and
pass through Parliament shouldn't he'd
be a bit more civil to the opposition
and instead of kind of touting this
trump-like stuff he's coming out with in
Parliament
secondly on a more principled level I'd
like to ask mr. cleverly whether he
thinks that a nice way to honor Joe
Cox's memory might be to show some
compassion and apologize what does he
agree
the the point that I was trying to make
is that this is such a device it is
inherently a divisive issue because it
was a binary question and there there is
no really easy what that wasn't it was a
very specific question would it be a way
to honor gee honor Joe Cox's memory
Apollo would Boris Johnson apologizing
saying for what yes what happened at
yesterday in Parliament well
understanding behind the Speaker's chair
specifically the fact that he said the
best way to honor Joe Cox's memory is to
get brexit done well the point Minister
I mean he could have used different
language I think the point he was trying
to make in fact I know the point your
son makes I spoke with him about it was
he was trying to say that resolving this
issue will enable us to get on with
other things that people are passionate
about but where there is a whether is
fundamentally much more unanimity good
good and and and I think that is that is
an honorable and Noble aspiration to get
beyond this very divisive issue so we
can start talking about things don't
bring us much more to needs to apologize
about what he said about Joe Cox is that
correct well no at the point I'm saying
is that what he what he said what he
meant well no I don't think he should
apologize because the point because the
point is he was saying we want to get
beyond this issue so we can talk about
the things that people are passionate
about like education like the health
service these are the things where we
can't there's a lots of hazard let's
just hear a few more points for I get
around the rest of panelist the man in
the white shirt hello I think we've got
it wrong as a Parliament as a government
and as a country yesterday by bringing
up that poor lady's name Joe Cox I don't
want to go through it again this evening
on a BBC show I think we should leave
that to the family this obviously going
to be still grieving it was a very
desperate situation and I think a lot of
us would appreciate it if that poor
lady's name wasn't brought up again in
politics is for the family isn't offer
it's not for us to bring now lady's name
into
into the house I think Joe Cox is name
needs to be brought up because she was
killed because of right-wing extremism
and the language the inflammatory
language that was used yesterday firstly
by the Attorney General whose speech got
more and more inflammatory I felt he
performed to Parliament rather than
delivering and delivering his speech and
he didn't apologize and then Boris
Johnson came in and didn't apologize
that set the tone of the whole debate I
watched it for hours yesterday and I was
appalled and mr. cleverly for you to say
let's get on to a different topic
Joe Swenson made a very good point
yesterday her child is taught to say
sorry people needed to hear that
yesterday from our prime minister he has
created chaos he is creating this fear
and incitement now between people in
Parliament and the language that he's
you he's an Oxford scholar and for him
to be saying that it was humbug he knew
exactly what he was saying and I think
it is a disgrace and it doesn't matter
let's go on to a different topic he
needs to apologize
[Applause]
I don't think the Prime Minister should
have dismissed the particular concerns
as humbug and I think perhaps reflecting
I would suspect he would be of that view
himself but I don't think the level of
anger out in the country primarily
reflects what politicians are saying I
think it reflects what their what
they're doing and particularly the
politicians are blocking brexit and
there were three words Boris was accused
of using one traitor he didn't use him
as a word I wouldn't want to use either
but he said that particular labour
members who said that they were would
bat brexit that they respected the
referendum but are now blocking brexit
he said that they betrayed their
promises to their constituents and I
think that is correct he then described
this act as a surrender act and the
reason he did that is because it
requires the government to accept any
extension EU offers and accept any
conditions the EU offers there is a
provision to go back to the Commons but
given it says it won't accept No Deal
breaks it that's not much for protection
so in terms of his language
I think his language was fair and I do
think it's important that we're able to
use plain language to describe what
politicians are doing when they said
they'd back brexit respect the
referendum but they're now blocking it
well firstly I don't suggest for a
moment that any political party has a
monopoly on virtue but I do think there
is a special responsibility on the
person who holds the highest political
office in the land
Paul the sheriff is somebody who
suffered appalling threats rape threats
death threats abuse online I do think it
was very wrong to dismiss the concern
she raises humbug
I do think Boris Johnson should
apologize perhaps it is time for a new
speaker who actually combats this
rhetoric from both sides handling
I think perhaps language is maybe a
secondary issue in the whole thing
because in a few weeks time what
politicians say will probably forgotten
or is far more impactful is the fact
that on both sides people have abused
parliamentary and legal both the
prorogation hunt inside both probation
and the Supreme Court decision I think a
vendor Minds UK the UK democratic system
severely I think in a long term that
would be far more damaging than the
language is being used currently this
week have you undermined democracy Gina
Miller since you either want to bring in
that court case didn't know okay they
was gonna say there's the pora Gatien
itself is not illegal every it happens
every year it's a very normal act in the
business of parliament but using it to
bypass and close down our
representatives that was a bit that was
illegal and it's a very unusual case and
we don't expect it to you know there
probably won't be a case like this again
for another however many years because I
don't expect a prime minister to behave
as this one has to actually be
stretching our constitution and his
legal boundaries to such a behavior no
modern Prime Minister has done this and
connecting it with the language and the
actions this speaks to me of weakness
and desperation that you don't have a
plan that is within the bounds of the
law you can't speak in a debate insist
tongue that speaks to me of weakness and
I think that the case when those people
who think this undermined democracy we
are a representative democracy until
that changes then parliamentary
sovereignty is the central core
principle of the stability of our
country and whatever happens with brexit
after that if we have a system that is
not respecting parliamentary sovereignty
and the separation of powers then we
have we are diminished by it as a
country as a democracy and as a
constitution and that is why the case
was important because what it did was
actually confirmed the separation of
powers and confirmed that no Prime
Minister is above the law even though I
am aware that Boris Johnson thinks he is
a law and himself he is not to worry
about inflammatory language well you
know I I looked at House of Commons
yesterday and it you know it felt like
staring into the abyss right and you
know the the the the sensible thing to
do when you stare into the abyss is to
take a step back right these are very
very dangerous times right I was I was a
member of parliament for nine years at a
very at what I thought was a very
divisive time during the war in Iraq
I've seen nothing like the level of
toxicity in in our politics that I'm
seeing now right okay and we we there
are huge things at stake which way
go away beyond Brett brexit okay there
is a level of anger you know in our
politics okay which actually is
paralyzing us no right we're not able to
have a civil conversation like politics
is about passionate disagreement but it
is also about the ability to have a
dialogue with with each other because
you know what you may have a little bit
of the truth over there and if I just
demonize you all the time then I can't
actually listen to you and learn
something by having that conversation
collapse Trust is collapsing in all of
our institutions right this is what is
at stake for us and so yes look there is
a self-denying ordinance I use colorful
language sometimes in politics as I'm a
passionate person as well but we all let
us now have to temper some of our
language we have to kind of stir
to listen to each other again that
doesn't mean that we still don't get to
disagree on these matters but if we
continue down the road that we're going
on no it's not going to end well for any
of us we all break laws on a day-to-day
basis do you think it's acceptable to do
so if it's in the national interest do
you all break laws on a day to day basis
I did a v10 do you have personal
experience
forgetting to indicate traffic laws we
all we all break a small lower now and
again as long as we can justify it are
you in the business I'm just wondering
yeah a police officer I guess I'm going
to come to you I mean I'm Boris Johnson
yes I was saying that the Supreme Court
is wrong I mean British jails are full
of people who think the verdict is wrong
he's not unique there are lots of people
who by definition thought the Supreme
Court judgment was wrong everyone argued
against it so our lawyers argued against
it Lord Chief Justice came to a
different conclusion so he clearly
judges in the left oh yes but they are
the ultimate arbiters oh yes and we
absolutely respect the the judgment that
they made but as I say I disagree with
it the prime-minister dispute Lord Chief
Justice disagree with James that's not
true because the 300 judges in the High
Court did not discuss the case what they
said was that they couldn't get over the
just disability barrier therefore
referred it up to the High Court they
said it had merit and referred it up to
the Supreme Court so they never actually
discussed the case and said it wasn't a
case that was worth discussing that's
really important but the but that's what
happened so the Supreme Court
the Supreme Court came to a judgement we
absolutely respect that judgment which
is why the House of Commons sat this
week this is why we came back because we
absolutely respect the judgment
respecting and disagreeing and this goes
to the point the broader point that
we're making is you can disagree and
maintain respect and that's that's our
position we respect the judgment we will
abide by the judge you respect that but
you reject it no we disagree with it no
no and this is really important we you
we absolutely respect it which is why
we've returned and which is why we we
abide by the decision
it is completely legitimate to disagree
with a judgment but also comply with it
and that's what's happened can I just
ask you about something that that's
breaking this evening actually just
before we came on air which is in terms
of Davis question breaking laws there's
also the been law now which would
require the government to either get a
deal October 31st and if it doesn't have
a deal in Parliament doesn't accept No
Deal an extension has to be a request
now John Major was talking this evening
saying that there may be a way around
this and that the government may in fact
try to bypass statute law by I mean it's
pretty involved folks I got to tell you
but by passing an order of counsel to
suspend the been at can you rule that
out there is no such thing as the been
act and we've talked about particular
law can you rule on John Slade you're
suggesting as a way around it so the
prime minister was criticized in
questions earlier for using a short hand
the EU withdrawal number to act which is
the one you'll be referring to which the
Prime Minister described as a surrender
act for the has been cleared the Prime
Minister has been clear that he and
government abides by the law but he's
also right that particular law well by
all laws right okay and and this
suggesting that John Major's making
tonight is getting a lot of traction in
the news that the government may see may
seek to bypass that law by passing an
order of Council to suspend it and -
laughter - that's October that's not
going to happen I'm not going to discuss
how we're gonna progress you know I'm
not gonna discuss because it
Tapan no and I didn't why I'll tell you
why because what we have seen in
Parliament is people bending conventions
just stepping outside standing orders
making up new procedures on the hoof in
order to prevent brexit being delivered
in the face of the largest electoral
event in our country's history and what
I'm not going to do is I'm not going to
talk through how the government intends
to discharge its business knowing full
well that there are a whole lot of
people who will try and distort every
procedure that we have in British
politics to try and prevent that and
hopefully people will understand why I'm
a little bit reticent as is explaining
exactly how other people will try and
prevent the government discharge duty
Retin to rule it out
firstly I think it's the position that
we started and that's that I'm sure
there are people in this room today who
think we have some laws that are
sensible I'm sure there are people that
think we have other laws that are not so
sensible but you are all we are all
expected to comply with the law now the
issue that arises here is that it cannot
be the case that Voris Johnson is
treated in a different way from the rest
of us that he can choose to defy the law
when he wants to but that doesn't apply
to anybody else like everyone in this
room he should respect the rule of law
he should comply with the act of
Parliament that's been passed and I mean
what James James is saying that he won't
rule out using an ordering counsel
procedure to defeat the statutory
purpose of the bill is quite
extraordinary and if the government gets
into that position our constitutional
crisis will be all the grave now what I
says I'm not going to discuss what I
made clear is that the Prime Minister
and the government will abide by the law
they called Henry the eighth's power
zone thing I'm saying essentially I mean
so that's that's what we're going back
to folks okay you know you know before
the you know the parliamentary democracy
it kind of became the fundamental
principle of a constitution you know
look I I think it's important that we we
emphasize cause the central fact in our
Constitution that actually nobody be
they so high is above the law and
actually that includes the Prime
Minister you know the government
actually is also itself subject to legal
restraints because the opposite of thus
of course is you know it's tyranny or
anarchy right so it's part of our
Constitution we have a balanced
Constitution we have Parliament there we
have obviously the executive and then
the courts working in tandem so we can
actually have a a proper system based on
the rule of law and you know I mean
essentially I welcome the
call the core decision that the court
made really was that you can't have a
system of the parliamentary democracy
and give an unfettered right to the
government to actually suspend
Parliament indefinitely yeah so there
has to be a reasonable limit if it was a
prorogation of five or six days the
average then that would have been
reasonable you go beyond that and
particularly when you don't provide a
good reason for that then obviously then
you are beginning to suspend Parliament
in a way that prevents Parliament doing
its job so I think what it breaks it out
of it right there will be other issues
in the future where you will you will
have different sympathies maybe if you
didn't agree with the effect of this in
the short term politically you we should
all be glad of the fact that we live in
a country where democratic principles
and the rule of law at the heart of what
happens because that isn't true in many
many other parts of the world there are
lots of you say Boris Johnson respects
the Supreme Court ruling but he's proven
time and time again that he doesn't
really respect anything he doesn't
respect the rule of law well in what
part of that circus act that he put on
yesterday was he respecting the ruling
of the Supreme Court by virtue of sight
we're in Parliament was respecting these
he didn't choose to come back okay it
was made to fly back from New York to be
there to be held accountable but the
things that he's trying to do let me
just get round a few of the audience
here yes commander in a structure and
isn't the law being used to vitiate the
result of the referendum the man in the
t-shirt back now you talk about respect
that you talk about obeying laws and
following laws yet no one is respecting
the law that said 17 four million people
voted brexit
[Applause]
I mean we've no idea whether this Privy
Council naki whatever it is I hadn't
heard of it I'll have to be honest
before this evening whether or not the
government may do that but if there's
nothing unlawful about it why shouldn't
they well they should if I could just
ever watch this if this is so difficult
because we have an unwritten
Constitution and as long as they're
within the law there's nothing wrong
with that and this is a whole thing that
you know I hear people up in arms and
peace up in arms because they're saying
Oh Boris might / oak again well if he
does it legally he's allowed to provoke
part of it before at Queen's speech as
long as it's four or five days all
success or however many days that it so
as long as he's acting within the law
what I would wish I hoped when you know
if I hadn't taken this action you know
MPs shouldn't be wouldn't have been back
where they should be doing the job we
pay them to do but I have to say this
amount of time and effort I hear being
expelled in trying to find ways out of
things and trying to find really ancient
tools and why don't they use that time
and effort into trying to get deal going
to you use your energy in a different
way with the time we've got left
surely there was 520 or MPs voted for
the referendum
so once the referendum result came in a
17 point 4 million people voted to leave
surely that is the law of this our
Parliament a new MP should have acted on
that we wouldn't be in this position now
where everybody's arguing the MP the the
MPs voted by to trigger article 50 they
then voted to pass the withdrawal act
then they the there is a withdrawal act
in place in 2018 so they've actually
passed three bits of legislation to
enact the referendum and they're now
having to go towards a last bit of this
so this idea that they're acting I don't
understand you have to look at what
they've been trying to do and this idea
that MPs are trying to frustrate what
they're doing no no I'm sorry you're not
open
but I thought we were gonna bring back
everything to our loads and our courts
and they were gonna be the ones who
decided everything because we then peace
couldn't decide about staying in Europe
so they got to the end yet they asked us
what the our opinions were we voted to
leave but I'm saying that I was doing
that faith got to the end yet no because
all you lot are not don't want us to get
to the end what we should know we should
be up to euro well they think Boston I'm
not the MP so I'm not in Parmalee well
let it would you will help you will stop
this doing it no I have it I made sure
it's legal no no 50 if it doesn't comply
with our constitutional requirements we
will be we will be actually contributing
international laws we're gonna campaign
for 30 years I've been doing this for a
very long time keeping tabs on what's
going on this is not just an overnight
if it was a remained government and a
brexit Parliament you were doing break
the law exactly so I've been doing this
ten years ago I would have I've been
doing it for the whole time
look at what you know the previous
government ten years ago in the space of
one year they use secondary legislation
ninety-six time to take away our rights
and there were letters being flouted
sent off to them all the time saying you
can't do this with Henry the eight
powers so I've been doing this for a
very long time clock records
in a democracy where laws are properly
made and properly interpreted of course
we should obey the law the problem we
now have ins we've heard about this from
the audience is that people voted to
leave the European Union they were told
they were being given the decision and
the government would implement what you
decided but that hasn't been Breck City
is being blocked by people who don't
like brexit by people who voted remain
and think their views are a greater
Valley than the majority who voted to
leave and we are seeing in Parliament
and Fred as James was saying we're
seeing the procedures of the House of
Commons the Standing Orders abused and
frankly we've had someone in the chair
who has allowed his own personal
preference for remain to influence how
he assesses and frankly breaks those
Standing Orders and that's how this
surrender Act was passed and then we
think about the interpretation of John
Burke I was also always insisted that he
doesn't have a preference he believed
that you'd believe anything but laws
also need to be properly interpreted and
we have a Supreme Court that came to a
judgement which described by Lord
sumption who retired from the court just
nine months ago and has made a career
out of urging judicial restraint but on
this occasion he said that the judgment
was revolutionary but he supported it
and unlike the justices he's actually
being quite open about some of his
reasons and some of the background to
that he says that the referendum was
misguided and therefore he's pleased
that the powers are being pushed back to
Parliament because the 52% shouldn't be
allowed to enjoy 100% of their victory
Parliament should ensure we stay in the
EEA
or in the customs union because
supposedly how narrow it was now would
he be saying that if it was the other
way around if leave had lost remain had
got 52% would he be saying we should
leave the European Union and perhaps go
into the EEA to take account of that 48%
no of course he wouldn't
he said that referendum was nothing more
than a snapshot of
he was he was one of the judges on
Gina's previous did we dismiss the tried
and tested rules of statutory
interpretation in this case there had
been a law passed to implement the
Treaty of Lisbon article 49 called
Essaouira laws to allow treaties well at
full process it put restrictions and how
the government could use that but
Parliament that no equivalent
restrictions on article 50 interpret to
rule in favor of Gina against the
government and it's been the effect of
putting a roadblock in the way a
breakfast he's not in this in this file
I think his remark he was in the
previous trial I think his remarks in
the media given here any retired nine
months ago are ill-advised because
people may see it much more through the
prism of leave and remain if you've
recently retired justices saying the
referendum was misguided before we go
any further because I can see he's gonna
go back with it forward I just need to
tell you that next week will be in
Wallasey that's very important next
we'll be in Wallace II and the following
week we're in Beckenham with Theo
Paphitis who's a dragon of course on
dragon BB strike and dead and if you
want to be in the audience and I can
guarantee will be lovely if tonight only
to go by you like me in the audience
call owt oh one two three 99-88 or
coursing go to the question on website
you can follow the instructions there
let's take another question from Jamie
Jenkins yeah isn't it time for the
opposition parties to admit that they
will never vote for any deal at Boris
negotiates
well you know and we certainly don't
agree with a kind of extreme you know
hard brexit vision that he's so far set
out all we have is a blank piece of
paper that's all the European Union has
so you know listen will will will listen
to anyone what anyone has to say but
it's I mean can I suggest can I said
yesterday okay look the only way we're
in this position right because there was
an election right in 2017 MP is elected
by the people that didn't support the
policy that was presented by the
Conservative government and essentially
we were a hung parliament the
Conservative Party hasn't even even been
able to agree amongst itself and we
stuck with going round in circles and
can we all agree that we don't want to
be having this conversation in the
question times years in the future oh
yeah let's agree that what's likely to
happen is Parliament be continually
going round in circles all kinds of
interesting techniques on both sides
tried everywhere right it's not gonna
solve anything we're gonna still get me
in the same position we may have an
election I can tell you now that
election won't solve anything you'll be
another hand Parliament will be back
exactly the same place now I can
understand why people that voted leave
don't agree with this they don't like it
they feel that they're not being
listened to I understand that was part
of the reason why many people voted
leave right but I can tell you now the
only way that we're gonna resolve this
Parliament's not going to do this
Parliament's not gonna resolve it the
next parliament is not resolve it we've
got to take it back to where it begun
we've got to take it back to the people
[Applause]
one last look I understand where the
gentleman is coming one last lane all
right okay this next referendum clearly
has to be not an advisory referendum it
has to be a binding referendum
unless let the people have their final
say let's get on now what happened to
the newer kind of gentle politics
I'm afraid Adam you were getting you're
getting the reaction you are because we
had a referendum and he refused to
respect the result now can we do now
quite Henry didn't oppose having the
referendum you abstained but when you
didn't like the results you've sought to
undermine it you have campaigned against
it and you refuse to accept the results
and we are a democracy in our democracy
can only function if the losers consent
and when I lose an election as I did in
Rochester in 2015 I accepted the result
we had a referendum in 2016 we need to
implement the result if you have a
referendum ask the people that some
politicians don't like the result and
then tell them they have to vote again
without implementing what they've said
then you undermine democracy and you
caused massive anger
[Applause]
what you said is actually not correct
okay after the referendum like we we put
forward a proposal right okay a proposal
which actually was the least damaging
brexit which could maintain access to
the single market we wouldn't listen to
because what we had increasingly the
Conservative government went further and
further to the extremes his polarize
debates the pivot to the point now where
the only resolution is to take it back
to the people's what otherwise this is
going to go on forever in name only
the the the leaflet that went to every
household in the country had a line
which is famous we will implement your
decision it was a promise that was made
by both sides of the referendum in the
in the in the days leading up to the
referendum itself I was being
interviewed by Nick watt who was at news
night and this was when the universal
expectation was that remain was going to
women and he asked me if you lose by
even 1% will you accept the result and I
said yes absolutely
that's how referenda work against
expectations leave one that referendum
in the days of media afterwards senior
voices and Liberal Democrats said you
have to respect the referendum result
senior voices the Labour Party said you
fast fuel to last for a few years and
suddenly the Liberal Democrats are
saying they're going to scrap article 15
without even reference to another
referendum other political parties are
saying that please believe us because
whilst we didn't respect the last
referendum
we'll definitely respect the next
referendum as long as we've got the
result we want this time round
Thompson is going around classic the
right way to try and build consensus
with the opposition given what happened
yesterday Theresa Macken same reason
they burnt through all her political
capital she sacrificed her career in an
attempt to get the consensus she invited
leaders the opposition parties in she
received assurances that in certain
circumstances if for example men decide
the days against ADA's are over for
example she was she was told if for
example the the future declaration was
stripped away from the withdrawal
agreement that was something Labour MPs
could vote for the future declaration
wall streets away from the dual
agreement and then they refused to vote
for it after all and people say oh if
you brought it back we will vote for
this time well let's see let's see
the Prime Minister is negotiating really
hard we've seen movement small amounts
of movement but we've seen movement on
the e use position he's working to get a
deal and if he can bring that deal back
we will see whether those MPs are as
good as their word and will vote for it
but we've also made absolutely clear for
actually for many of the reasons that
you said we cannot just go round in
circles we were brought back from the
poor again and what did we see yesterday
another three hours of debate add it to
the previous 500 hours of debate that we
have already had and no further forward
not a singie new argument was put
forward in yesterday's debate we cannot
keep going round like this we've got to
resolve this issue so we can move on and
as a safe talk about police and
hospitals and education and transport
which of the things that people like you
tell me when I'm on the doorstep they
want politicians to be talking back to
the original question is it time the
opposition parties it's Jamie's question
to admit that they will never vote for
any deal Boris Johnson negotiates well I
do vote for a deal but let me just
explain I have voted in Parliament for
the option leaving the European Union
with a customs union place I voted for
the option of leaving where there was
strong single market access and why did
I do that because if both respected the
referendum result but also protected
jobs and likelihoods in my
constitutive question is would you vote
for any noise dance now though I think
the problem is that we come so far from
the original 2016 position the kind of
brags if the Boris Johnson is driving
towards is a hard no deal breaks it I
cannot support a No Deal greg's it I
believe it would damage jobs and
livelihoods in my constituency that is
not something that I can support nor do
I believe it has a democratic mandate so
what I believe the way forward should be
is firstly to take that option off the
table ensure that it is off the table
I think we then need to have a general
election and our party policy has
decided our conference last week is
within six months of that election we
will then put this issue with a credible
leave option and a remain option what I
will do is what I have done all along
for this and that is to judge the deals
that he's put before me I will look at
that deal when it is negotiated and I
will then make that judgement and put it
to my constituents woman no how can we
use the word democracy when the margins
were so small 52% 2% of the 2% wanted
brexit more than the front
4% but almost half the current do 248 ha
almost half the country desperately want
to remain in the EU but potentially more
now that people are old enough to vote
the young
[Applause]
Nick how can you say your constituents
don't want a No Deal have you asked any
of them I'm from your constituency I'd
be happy with a No Deal I believe all
our MPs now should be more honest more
trustworthy so more integrity listen to
us we voted out at a referendum how many
more times we got a vote before you
leave take this factor because I'm not a
politician but if our business
perspectives so there is a promise you
know you had your package when we were
voting in the referendum and as levers I
would say you have to be you should be I
would suggest very very angry not just
because we haven't actually progressed
but also because if you judge against
what was promised it was going to be the
easiest trade deals in the world will be
able to you know would be able to get to
you know all the car industry in Germany
would be so worried that they will bend
over backwards to make sure that
everything is going to work those things
have not happened and we actually don't
have I'm sorry but we don't have those
trade deals in place we don't have we
are not allowed to even no no but there
was going to be the easiest thing and
we're going to have to go to them we're
not like a shape trade deals because
we're no well then why was Liam Fox
flying around the world polluting the
planners because King ran six you saw me
to suicide the large number of
continuity do but we are not allowed to
sign in we are not allowed to have an
independent trade policy you know until
we have left the country and which is
what we're doing the countries have said
so far
for example India have said that were
very interested but we'd also like free
movement for quite a few of our people
that's not the point what I was trying
to say was I think it's it honesty this
gentleman said is a really really
important word because the yellowhammer
reports the next versions are supposed
to be coming updated soon then surely
everybody because whatever you voted
leave is don't live in a bubble and
remainders don't live in a bubble the
effects of whatever happens next is
going to affect all of us because we all
live in the same country so the fact is
surely we should make informed decisions
and I have to say my preference would be
for a general election because at the
moment I don't trust this weird
situation we're in this weird situation
where the government does not have a
majority as the point that Adam made and
members of parliament are using
centuries-old procedures which have
which have not been used for centuries
to dictate the government's actions and
then when we have said look if you want
to be the government have a general
election test your hypothesis with the
British electorate and if they want you
to be the government then you can be the
government and what's Labour's response
no we don't want to be the government
but we don't want you to be the
government question is it's not the
opposition party admit they'll never
vote for any deal boys negotiates well
you want a clean brexit where you call a
No Deal I think they should admit that
because what they want to do is lock
brexit what's I agree with Gina that we
should have a general election but
unfortunately those who lost the last
election particularly labour don't want
to have an election keep on voting
against it because they want to use
their current position in order to block
brexit but the problem is made worse by
the promises that Theresa May said she
said that we would leave the customs
union she said we would leave the single
market she said we would leave the
jurisdiction of the European Court of
Justice yet with her deal none of those
things happened she tried to keep us in
the customs union she signed up to a
backstop that we'd never be able to
leave without the European Union's
permission and said we'd continue
obeying their laws in all these
different areas while having no say in
them
that wasn't brexit and our concern in
the brexit party is Boris will make a
few little tweaks to the deal and I'll
either get it voted through Parliament
or he'll go to that have an election and
if he does win that election will he
actually stick to what he's been saying
about a proper brexit or will he go back
towards where Teresa main was and what
Nigel Farage said on the day program
yesterday was we would like to see a
clean break brexit but we would also
support a Canada style free trade
agreement as the Conservatives initially
promised that would genuinely give us
back our independence and give us what
we voted for where are you Rosalind
they want philosophers consider env to
be evil and destructive is it envy which
fuels Labour's desire to steal other
people's property
talking about private schools there I'm
talking about private schools I'm
talking about the more recent one which
I think was announced yesterday about
empty homes if they're empty for six
months that early say that the council's
could just compulsorily purchase them
there they're approved prior to that had
john macdonald saying about just over a
week ago
and that landlords would be forced to
sell their properties to their tenants
at some price that he would set which we
all know would just be nothing and would
be the equivalent of stealing property
we got shares as well okay so there's a
long list there I mean I mean looking at
let's pick one private schools I mean
the motion of the labor conference said
that private schools would have their
assets redistributed former barrister do
you support that I do support the thrust
of this policy support not be absolutely
I will I would never support any policy
that broke the law and any labor
governor will respect the rule of law
but what but there is a there is a
debate try to be had here because there
are what 7% of the population go to
independent schools 93% go to state
schools no nobody can help their
background but there is a systemic
problem when that 7% is dominating at
the top of all our professions we need
to look radically at that exactly not
what the question is about I don't think
with the bras needs taking issue with
that well Rosen is talking about is
is would not happen the point
distribution of assets wouldn't happen
what we are looking at is three things
is that whereas three things not illegal
redistribution sequestration of assets
however you want to call it would not
happen what there are three points this
policy number one we would introduce
first of all v80 on private school fees
and that money would be used to fund
free school meals secondly we would take
away the charitable status of
independent schools all the money that's
currently been spent to subsidize them
in terms of business rates could be
spent more equitably elsewhere the issue
in the motion the thrust of the motion
is about looking at longer term could we
then to tear down the walls between the
state and private sector and education
have them back in the state sector to do
that we would ask the social mobility
commission to look at it to do it in a
fair and obviously lawful way but let's
not move away from the central point
here we all live in a country I'm afraid
where the circumstances into which you
are born determine far more where you
end up than your talents or your efforts
that has to change we have to think
radically about it and what we are
seeing from the Labour Party is a
reversion to a politics of envy that we
haven't seen in British politics for a
very very long time I go all around the
country and I see aspirational parents
many of whom from ethnic backgrounds if
you go to a lot of private schools you
will see children or families who have
made huge personal sacrifices to give
their children a good education and I
think it is perverse to criticize
parents for doing so just as Diane
Abbott did and Charlie Chakrabarti did
and you know I've never criticized them
for supporting their children's
education this seizure and the pas de
seizure of assets is deeply wrong we've
seen it in a private residential
property with the reference you made
assets of schools we see
business assets gonna be stripped and
again redistributed by a Labour
government and if that doesn't sound
sinister to you it really should and the
thing is these policies really James
these policies would break the British
economy and the people who suffer when
the British economy breaks are not the
international jet-setting people because
they can move themselves and their money
to other jurisdictions it will be the
people who cannot run away from the
economic collapse that a Labour
government will bring it will be the
teachers in state schools and doctors
and nurses and council workers and small
business owners and the people like you
in this you will be the ones left
holding the we seem to have two main
political parties who are going more and
more extreme and the problem is that you
know that you can't talk because of
austerity and what you've done to the
country and I think that the fact is the
idea of just throwing out the baby the
bathwater the problem we have with our
educational system is not just about
independent schools you know we have
teachers who are teaching maths when
they don't have a degree in maths or any
sort of qualifications the average
salary is 13,000 pounds you know we
don't value teachers and how are you
going to close schools you know the
extreme close independent schools we
need to build about 90 more schools just
to get the kids in one town into schools
and where you can put all the people
from private school I mean it's about
fairness and both main parties I believe
should actually come together and look
at policies that are fair we need a fair
Society not an extreme one
I think in what it's proposed by labor
reminds me almost said that the
dissolution of the monasteries you've
had these private schools built up over
centuries and the Labour Party policy
has passed by Labour conference whatever
NYX says now is to expropriate
the assets of those private schools and
redistribute them to the state sector
and the lady mention is it's not just
schools as other areas they want to do
it to housing and I think just announced
yesterday the pharmaceutical industry if
you've spent all this money developing a
drug Jeremy called in to assess our pace
state-owned generic drug manufacturer
he's gonna force the drug companies to
give their drugs and how they're made
the state and then the state's gonna
supply the NHS with misunderstands the
policy and I'm and I've done a lot of
campaigning on access to cancer drugs
we're called repurpose drugs you know
drugs license to one use but they then
have another excellent use and you just
can't get those drugs to the patients
yes absolutely
a drug company that invests in the
research is required gets a patent to be
able to make some money out of that but
what you can't have is a block from big
pharmaceutical companies after that
preventing drugs from getting to the
public and the suggestion that we've
made about looking in addition to the
private sector that's there yes a
publicly owned body that would really
assist that it would have the impact of
making sure that patients who require
the drugs - they actually get them the
impacts in fact
seeing as me during the sending the
thing that occurs to me with Janette the
publicly-owned generics manufacturer
you've just idea you just mentioned that
free social care in a video also
announces a policy for England the next
election you're in government here in
Wales why don't you do that now the
problems of inequality of educational
opportunity you could ban private
education in Wales you're in government
here why don't you do it here what's the
[Applause]
social care what's worth spending per
heads but 11% higher here in Wales under
Labour government specific about your
policy or little bit schools that you've
just you know in terms of the adoption
of that policy we've just gone through
our comms we will now look of course at
implementing it in the months and years
ahead in Wales as well as everywhere
else look I mean Finland was mentioned
by Jeremy Corbyn it's the only country
in Europe where actually you can't pay
for education but he missed the key
point it has the most successful
education system in the world but the
key point is in in the state sector in
Finland they pay teachers way above what
we what we're able to do and they're
able to then attract the best into
teaching you know everyone in teaching
at kindergarten level has a master's
degree I mean that's the level ambition
so you focused on the wrong element of
the Finnish recipe for success what we
should be doing is investing in our
state education system so this is just
as good as the independent sector said
nobody actually wants to needs to send
their children there at all
[Applause]
[Music]
we are we are out of time so forgive me
for that I just focus on how extreme the
policies were coming out of the Labor
Party conference and that's before we
even look at what they're saying about
extending free movement to not just
Europe at all world let's not get onto
to another subject but we hear you I
just want to say I just I get word in
edgeways actually I don't know about you
that that is almost it from us our next
program is in Wallasey the following
week we're in Beckenham you know the
score by now call o dot 301 - 399 88 if
you'd like to be in the audience or you
can go the question on website you can
follow the instructions there or our is
up
thank you to my panel to all of you here
and of course you at home for listening
and watching but before we go it is 40
years of question time tonight this is
our 40th anniversary so at some of the
highlights over the last 40 years see
how you think it compares
[Music]
hello and here we are for the first of
our weekly question times mrs. Thatcher
has gone to Europe she's banged just
about every conference table in Europe
demanding changes Andrew deal well I'm
glad that the Labour Party's finally
made up his mind that it wants to stay
in Europe because that's a major
achievement for a start when a minority
of members effectively behave like a
football hooligan Terrace mob and
deliberately try with a football Terrace
type charm to prevent someone from
completing their but what the Labour
Party's been saying we've been saying
this all along is that there is an
alternative and that alternative is
based not on dogma but on common sense
we can why is it always millionaires
like yourself get uptight about to pound
an hour for people on me I'll tell you
because I know something about actually
creating jobs as opposed to just talking
about you've done a lot better than your
work yes
which one is mr. Roger Freeman watching
this programme in France they'd see a
whole load of Brits a worrying again
about whether their beef is safe to say
that one thing I agree with Diane Abbott
on is that I haven't been eating French
though the Golden Delicious for a long
time I should don't have to have a
referendum I think I think on an issue
of great constitutional importance it is
right to ask people what they think I
think the European Constitution is a
great mistake so I think we need to
really get back to their job being to
make sure that the long-term interests
of the bank I'm at rather than anyone
else isn't good that's good
and now we're in this situation we're
all going down that fork and you're
[Laughter]
this is my stopwatch saying it's bedtime
thank you very much for staying up so
late you may not go to bed sleep well
thank you for watching join us again
next Thursday from Glasgow until then
good night from Cardiff good night
[Applause]
[Music]